migration-guides/0.5-to-main.md, before:

# Migrating From v0.5 to `main`

This file contains migration guides for breaking changes that have happened on the `main` branch
since the latest release. These guides are evolving and may not be polished yet.

See [migration-guides/README.md](./README.md) and existing entries for information about Avian's
migration guide process and what to put here.

## Broad Phase Rework

PR [#927](https://github.com/avianphysics/avian/pull/927) overhauled broad phase collision detection
to use a Bounding Volume Hierarchy (BVH).

`BroadPhasePlugin` has been replaced by two plugins:

- `BroadPhaseCorePlugin`: Sets up resources, system sets, and diagnostics required for broad phase collision detection.
- `BvhBroadPhasePlugin`: Implements a broad phase using a BVH to efficiently find overlapping AABBs.

The latter can be swapped out for a custom broad phase implementation if desired.
See the documentation of the `broad_phase plugin for more information.

The `BroadPhaseSystems::UpdateStructures` system set has also been removed.
The BVH acceleration structures are updated by the `ColliderTreePlugin`,
in `ColliderTreeSystems::UpdateAabbs`.

Contact pair creation order can be different from before due to the new broad phase algorithm,
resulting in slightly changed behavior (but you should not rely on a specific contact order anyway).
The order should still be deterministic across runs, given the same inputs.

Previously, `ContactPair::body1` and `ContactPair::body2` also used the `Entity` of the collider
if the collider was not attached to a body. Now, the properties are instead `None`.

## Joint Motors

`RevoluteJoint` and `PrismaticJoimt` now store motors for driving movement.
By default, they are disabled, so this should not be a breaking change for most applications.

## `ReadRigidBodyForces` and `WriteRigidBodyForces`

PR [#908](https://github.com/avianphysics/avian/pull/908) introduced two new traits: `ReadRigidBodyForces` and `WriteRigidBodyForces`, and `RigidyBodyForces` is now defined as:

```rust
pub trait RigidBodyForces: ReadRigidBodyForces + WriteRigidBodyForces {}
```

In most cases this should just work, but if it doesn't, you can replace your implementation for `RigidBodyForces` with both `ReadRigidBodyForces` and `WriteRigidBodyForces` where it is used / needed. Both traits are required to implement `RigidBodyForces`, but you can implement them separately.

## `SleepBody` and `WakeBody`

The `SleepBody` and `WakeBody` commands now return an error when applied for an entity that doesn't exist
or doesn't belong to an island. Previously, they logged a warning instead.

Commit message:

Use `ColliderTrees` for spatial queries (#941)
# Objective

Fixes #403.

#927 added `ColliderTrees` for the new BVH broad phase. We should reuse
them for spatial queries instead of maintaining and using a separate BVH
from Parry.

## Solution

In short:

- Add more traversal methods on `Bvh2` via extension traits (we should
probably upstream these)
- `sweep_traverse`, `sweep_traverse_miss`, `sweep_traverse_anyhit`, and
`sweep_traverse_dynamic`
  - `squared_distance_traverse` and `squared_distance_traverse_dynamic`
- Add methods for BVH traversal on `ColliderTree`
  - `ray_traverse_closest` and `ray_traverse_all`
  - `sweep_traverse_closest` and `sweep_traverse_all`
  - `squared_distance_traverse_closest`
  - `point_traverse`
  - `aabb_traverse`
- Remove `SpatialQueryPipeline`, and use the `ColliderTrees` traversal
methods for `SpatialQuery`

This involved some other miscellaneous changes:

- Shape casts now returns hits in arbitrary order when `max_hits > 1`,
similar to ray casts.
- `point2` and `normal2` were previously in local space, despite what
the docs state. They are now in world space.

## Testing

Tested different spatial queries in examples.

---

## Showcase

Before, updating the spatial query pipeline was extremely expensive for
large scenes with a lot of colliders:

<img width="263" height="439" alt="Before"
src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0cc11950-cd69-434a-90f6-1fa517d255f9"
/>

(note that the tree optimization cost is partially hidden here, as it is
run in parallel with the spatial query pipeline update)

Now, using the much more optimized `ColliderTrees`, that overhead is
gone:

<img width="263" height="439" alt="After"
src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e39091f1-3a6f-4cfd-b22d-c8ac9c646b5f"
/>

## Future Work

- Generic collider types for spatial queries (#810)

migration-guides/0.5-to-main.md, after:

# Migrating From v0.5 to `main`

This file contains migration guides for breaking changes that have happened on the `main` branch
since the latest release. These guides are evolving and may not be polished yet.

See [migration-guides/README.md](./README.md) and existing entries for information about Avian's
migration guide process and what to put here.

## Broad Phase

PR [#927](https://github.com/avianphysics/avian/pull/927) overhauled broad phase collision detection
to use a Bounding Volume Hierarchy (BVH).

`BroadPhasePlugin` has been replaced by two plugins:

- `BroadPhaseCorePlugin`: Sets up resources, system sets, and diagnostics required for broad phase collision detection.
- `BvhBroadPhasePlugin`: Implements a broad phase using a BVH to efficiently find overlapping AABBs.

The latter can be swapped out for a custom broad phase implementation if desired.
See the documentation of the `broad_phase plugin for more information.

The `BroadPhaseSystems::UpdateStructures` system set has also been removed.
The BVH acceleration structures are updated by the `ColliderTreePlugin`,
in `ColliderTreeSystems::UpdateAabbs`.

Contact pair creation order can be different from before due to the new broad phase algorithm,
resulting in slightly changed behavior (but you should not rely on a specific contact order anyway).
The order should still be deterministic across runs, given the same inputs.

Previously, `ContactPair::body1` and `ContactPair::body2` also used the `Entity` of the collider
if the collider was not attached to a body. Now, the properties are instead `None`.

## Spatial Queries

PR [#941](https://github.com/avianphysics/avian/pull/941) changed spatial queries to reuse
the `ColliderTrees` used by the broad phase.

### Removed `SpatialQueryPipeline`

The `SpatialQueryPipeline` has been removed. Instead, use the `SpatialQuery` system parameter,
or for lower level control, use the `ColliderTrees` resource directly.

If you get query conflicts because `SpatialQuery` queries for `&Position` and `&Rotation` and your system
also queries for them mutably, consider deferring the mutation to a later point to avoid the conflict.

Previously, you could call `SpatialQuery::update_pipeline()` to update the internal acceleration structures
when you have made changes to colliders or their positions, and need to perform spatial queries before the next physics step.
This method no longer exists, but there is instead a public `update_moved_collider_aabbs` system that you can run.

### Shape Cast Data

Shape casts now return hits in arbitrary order when `max_hits > 1`, similar to ray casts.
This is for performance reasons.

Previously, `point2` in `ShapeHitData` was also relative to the shape cast origin,
even though documentation described it as a global point. This has been fixed,
and it is now in world space like the other values.

## Joint Motors

`RevoluteJoint` and `PrismaticJoimt` now store motors for driving movement.
By default, they are disabled, so this should not be a breaking change for most applications.

## `ReadRigidBodyForces` and `WriteRigidBodyForces`

PR [#908](https://github.com/avianphysics/avian/pull/908) introduced two new traits: `ReadRigidBodyForces` and `WriteRigidBodyForces`, and `RigidyBodyForces` is now defined as:

```rust
pub trait RigidBodyForces: ReadRigidBodyForces + WriteRigidBodyForces {}
```

In most cases this should just work, but if it doesn't, you can replace your implementation for `RigidBodyForces` with both `ReadRigidBodyForces` and `WriteRigidBodyForces` where it is used / needed. Both traits are required to implement `RigidBodyForces`, but you can implement them separately.

## `SleepBody` and `WakeBody`

The `SleepBody` and `WakeBody` commands now return an error when applied for an entity that doesn't exist
or doesn't belong to an island. Previously, they logged a warning instead.
